docs/reference/converter-lang.adoc, before:

:mpshelp: https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps
:slangdocs: https://alexanderpann.github.io/mps-openapi-doc/javadoc_2021.2

= Reference for LionWeb Converter Language
:stylesheet: style.css
:experimental:
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 3
:sectnums:

LionWeb-MPS converts Languages and instance models between several different representations.
We provide concepts to easily configure and execute all available converters.

To use the converters, add the language `io.lionweb.mps.converter.lang` to your model.
Create the desired converter as root node.
Execute the conversion through an intention on the converter.
Check the btn:[Messages Pane] for results.

== MPS Language &rarr; JSON

=== Export MPS Language to JSON
Technical name: `ExportMpsLanguageToJson` / `Language2JsonConverter`

Converts a list of MPS Languages to LionCore JSON.
We use MPS' _Runtime Language_ representation.

Requires a file _path_ to write the JSON file to.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].

CAUTION: Existing files will be overwritten without notice!

MPS Language `A` _depends_ on all languages that are listed in ``A.structure``'s Model Properties Dependencies.

We can choose the _scope_ of conversion:

[horizontal]
listed:: 
Only convert the listed languages.
Fails if any of the converted languages _depends_ on a non-listed language.

indirect::
Convert all listed languages, and (transitive) _dependencies_.

fineGrainedClosure::
Converts all listed languages completely.
If any element in the listed languages uses an element from a non-listed language, we include the element of the non-listed language -- but not any other elements of that non-listed language.
We apply this strategy (known as _tree shaking_) transitively until we included all used elements.


== MPS Instance Model &harr; JSON

=== Export Instance to JSON
Technical name: `ExportInstanceToJson` / `AMps2LionWebConverter`

Converts a list of MPS nodes to LionWeb JSON.

Requires a file _path_ to write the JSON file to.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].

CAUTION: Existing files will be overwritten without notice!

We can choose the _scope_ of conversion:

[horizontal]
listed::
Only converts the listed nodes.

descendants::
Converts the listed nodes, and all descendants of each listed node.

closure::
Converts the listed nodes, all descendants, and all referenced nodes.
We apply this strategy until we include all Annotation, Containment, and Reference targets. 

=== Import Instance from JSON
Technical name: `ImportInstanceFromJson` / `MergingLionWeb2MpsConverter`

Converts a LionWeb JSON file into MPS nodes, stored into the current model.
If the current model already contains a node with the same id as an imported node, we https://github.com/LionWeb-io/specification/issues/25[merge] them.

Requires a file _path_ of the JSON file to read.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].


== LionCore M3 &harr; JSON

=== Export Language to JSON
Technical name: `ExportLanguageToJson` / `LionCore2JsonConverter`

Converts a list of `io.lionweb.mps.m3` instances to LionCore JSON.

Requires a file _path_ to write the JSON file to.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].

CAUTION: Existing files will be overwritten without notice!

=== Import Language from JSON
Technical name: `ImportLanguageFromJson` / `Json2LionCoreConverter`

Converts a LionCore JSON file to `io.lionweb.mps.m3` instances, stored into the current model.

Requires a file _path_ of the JSON file to read.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].


== MPS Language &harr; LionCore M3

=== Convert Language to LionCore
Technical name: `ConvertLanguageToLionCore` / `Language2LionCoreConverter` / `Mps2LionCoreConverter`

Converts a list of MPS Languages to `io.lionweb.mps.m3` instances.

We can convert either the _Language Nodes_ (i.e. the structure aspect of the MPS Language) or the _Runtime Language_ (i.e. link:{slangdocs}/org/jetbrains/mps/openapi/language/SLanguage.html[SLanguage]).
In doubt, use _Language Nodes_.

=== Convert Language from LionCore

NOTE: This converter is currently not maintained, but might be reactivated in the future.

Technical name: `ConvertLanguageFromLionCore` / `LionCore2MpsConverter`

Converts a list of `io.lionweb.mps.m3` instances to MPS Language structure aspects.

Commit message:

added user documentation how M1 export scopes handle nodes and ids.

docs/reference/converter-lang.adoc, after:

:mpshelp: https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps
:slangdocs: https://alexanderpann.github.io/mps-openapi-doc/javadoc_2021.2

= Reference for LionWeb Converter Language
:stylesheet: style.css
:experimental:
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 3
:sectnums:

LionWeb-MPS converts Languages and instance models between several different representations.
We provide concepts to easily configure and execute all available converters.

To use the converters, add the language `io.lionweb.mps.converter.lang` to your model.
Create the desired converter as root node.
Execute the conversion through an intention on the converter.
Check the btn:[Messages Pane] for results.

== MPS Language &rarr; JSON

=== Export MPS Language to JSON
Technical name: `ExportMpsLanguageToJson` / `Language2JsonConverter`

Converts a list of MPS Languages to LionCore JSON.
We use MPS' _Runtime Language_ representation.

Requires a file _path_ to write the JSON file to.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].

CAUTION: Existing files will be overwritten without notice!

MPS Language `A` _depends_ on all languages that are listed in ``A.structure``'s Model Properties Dependencies.

We can choose the _scope_ of conversion:

[horizontal]
listed:: 
Only convert the listed languages.
Fails if any of the converted languages _depends_ on a non-listed language.

indirect::
Convert all listed languages, and (transitive) _dependencies_.

fineGrainedClosure::
Converts all listed languages completely.
If any element in the listed languages uses an element from a non-listed language, we include the element of the non-listed language -- but not any other elements of that non-listed language.
We apply this strategy (known as _tree shaking_) transitively until we included all used elements.


== MPS Instance Model &harr; JSON

=== Export Instance to JSON
Technical name: `ExportInstanceToJson` / `AMps2LionWebConverter`

Converts a list of MPS nodes to LionWeb JSON.

Requires a file _path_ to write the JSON file to.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].

CAUTION: Existing files will be overwritten without notice!

We can choose the _scope_ of conversion:

[horizontal]
listed::
Only converts the listed nodes.

descendants::
Converts the listed nodes, and all descendants of each listed node.

closure::
Converts the listed nodes, all descendants, and all referenced nodes.
We apply this strategy until we include all Annotation, Containment, and Reference targets. 


.Inclusion of nodes and ids
The following table lists for each scope whether we include the target node / target node's id into the conversion.
Example: For _descendants_ scope, we include both the target node and the target id of annotations and children; we do not include the target node of references, but we do include the target id of references.

NOTE: If a node is included in the conversion for any reason (e.g. explicitly listed), we include their id at all places it is targeted, even if the _scope_ would not cover it.
Example: Assume we have node with id `a` containing node `b`, and `c` referring to both `a` and `b`.
We export `c` with _closure_ scope.
Now we mention `a` as parent of `b`, as both are included in the conversion. 
|===
|Scope |Annotations + Children |References |Parents

|listed      |no / yes  |no / yes  |no / yes
|descendants |yes / yes |no / yes  |no / yes
|closure     |yes / yes |yes / yes |no / no

|===


=== Import Instance from JSON
Technical name: `ImportInstanceFromJson` / `MergingLionWeb2MpsConverter`

Converts a LionWeb JSON file into MPS nodes, stored into the current model.
If the current model already contains a node with the same id as an imported node, we https://github.com/LionWeb-io/specification/issues/25[merge] them.

Requires a file _path_ of the JSON file to read.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].


== LionCore M3 &harr; JSON

=== Export Language to JSON
Technical name: `ExportLanguageToJson` / `LionCore2JsonConverter`

Converts a list of `io.lionweb.mps.m3` instances to LionCore JSON.

Requires a file _path_ to write the JSON file to.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].

CAUTION: Existing files will be overwritten without notice!

=== Import Language from JSON
Technical name: `ImportLanguageFromJson` / `Json2LionCoreConverter`

Converts a LionCore JSON file to `io.lionweb.mps.m3` instances, stored into the current model.

Requires a file _path_ of the JSON file to read.
We can use {mpshelp}/absolute-path-variables.html[path variables].


== MPS Language &harr; LionCore M3

=== Convert Language to LionCore
Technical name: `ConvertLanguageToLionCore` / `Language2LionCoreConverter` / `Mps2LionCoreConverter`

Converts a list of MPS Languages to `io.lionweb.mps.m3` instances.

We can convert either the _Language Nodes_ (i.e. the structure aspect of the MPS Language) or the _Runtime Language_ (i.e. link:{slangdocs}/org/jetbrains/mps/openapi/language/SLanguage.html[SLanguage]).
In doubt, use _Language Nodes_.

=== Convert Language from LionCore

NOTE: This converter is currently not maintained, but might be reactivated in the future.

Technical name: `ConvertLanguageFromLionCore` / `LionCore2MpsConverter`

Converts a list of `io.lionweb.mps.m3` instances to MPS Language structure aspects.
