docs/reference/structure-extensions.adoc, before:

:m3: https://lionweb-io.github.io/specification/metametamodel/metametamodel.html
:mpshelp: https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps
:slangdocs: https://alexanderpann.github.io/mps-openapi-doc/javadoc_2021.2
:underbracket: &#9141;

= Reference for LionWeb Extensions on MPS' Language Structure Aspect
:experimental:
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 3
:sectnums:

LionWeb can represent MPS languages in LionCore.
It supports most MPS languages without changes to the language; all limitations are listed in this document.

[[prerequisites]]
== Prerequisites
We amend MPS' language structure aspect with node attributes to support advanced LionWeb features.

To use advanced LionWeb features, add `io.lionweb.mps.structure.attribute` to the _Used Languages_ of the structure aspect of your language.


[[concept-partitions]]
== Concepts as partitions
In LionWeb, link:{m3}#partitions[partitions] serve as the container for one node tree (similar to _models_ in MPS).

Use intention menu:Toggle LionWeb Partition[] to add a boolean attribute `LionWeb partition` to a concept.
If no such attribute exists, we assume default value `false`.


[[optional-properties]]
== Optional properties
LionWeb supports link:{m3}#Feature.optional[optional properties] on structure level, whereas MPS only considers them on link:{mpshelp}/editor.html#propertycell[editor level].

Use intention menu:Toggle LionWeb Optional[] to add a boolean attribute `LionWeb optional` to a property.
If no such attribute exists, we assume default value `false`, i.e. consider the property as mandatory.


[[multi-references]]
== Multi-references
Unlike MPS, LionWeb supports link:{m3}#Link.multiple[multiple references], i.e. references with cardinality `{underbracket}..n`.
MPS approximates them with link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#smartreferences[smart references]; LionWeb formalizes this approach.

Use intention menu:Add LionWeb Smart Reference[] on a concept to turn the concept into a LionWeb smart reference.
Point the new attribute `LionWeb smart reference for` to a child with the smart reference as target.
LionWeb considers the child as a reference with the smart reference's target as type, and does not represent the smart reference itself.

=== Example
A `Book` can refer to zero or more `authors` of type `Writer`.
In MPS, we need an additional smart reference `WriterReference`, annotated with a `LionWeb smart reference for` that points at the child `Book.authors`.
LionWeb omits the smart reference, and turns MPS' `author` _child_ into a _reference_ with `multiple: true`.

.Book Concept
[text,subs="+quotes,replacements,attributes"]
----
_concept_ *Book* _extends_ *BaseConcept*
  ...
  _children:_
  *authors* : *WriterReference*[_0..n_]

  _references:_
  << .{empty}.. >>
----

.Writer Concept
[text,subs="+quotes,replacements,attributes"]
----
_concept_ *Writer* _extends_ *BaseConcept*
  ...
  _children:_
  << .{empty}.. >>

  _references:_
  << .{empty}.. >>
----

.WriterReference Concept
[text,subs="+quotes,replacements,attributes"]
----
_concept_ *WriterReference* _extends_ <default>
  ...
  _children:_
  << .{empty}.. >>

  _references:_
  *writer* : *Writer*[_1_]

  _LionWeb smart reference for:_ *Book.authors*
----

.LionWeb equivalent
[text,subs="+quotes,replacements,attributes"]
----
_Concept_ *Book*   _extends_ *Node*
  _Reference_ *authors*: *Writer*  _optional:_ *true*  _multiple:_ *true*

_Concept_ *Writer* _extends_ *Node*
  << .{empty}.. >>
----

=== Constraints on LionWeb smart reference concept
* Must be a concrete (i.e. non-`abstract`) concept
* Must not be used for anything else (e.g. a target of a reference, or super-concept)
* Must not extend any concept except `BaseConcept`
* Must not implement any interfaces
* Must not have any property members
* Must not have any child members
* Must have exactly one reference member


[[custom-keys]]
== Custom LionWeb keys
LionWeb uses link:{m3}#keys[keys] to refer to language entities.
By default, LionWeb-MPS derives the key from MPS' internal ids.
As language designer, we can customize the LionWeb key (e.g. if they need to be consistent across different implementations).

.Constraints
* Keys must be link:{m3}#identifiers[valid identifiers]
* Keys must be unique within one language.

[[custom-language-key]]
=== Custom language key
Create a root node of concept image:../../languages/io.lionweb.mps.structure.attribute/icons/lionweb.png[]{nbsp}``LionWeb Language Key`` inside a structure aspect to customize the language's key.

[[custom-element-key]]
=== Language element key
LionWeb-MPS supports custom keys for the following MPS language structure elements:

* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#conceptsandconceptinterfaces[Concept]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#conceptsandconceptinterfaces[Interface Concept]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#constraineddatatypes[Constrained Data Type]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#enumerationds[Enumeration]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#enumerationds[Enumeration Member]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#properties[Property]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#Children[Child]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#references[Reference]

Use intention menu:Toggle LionWeb Key Annotation[] to add or remove a LionWeb key.
Alternatively, use intention menu:Remove LionWeb key[] on the key itself to remove.


[[json-type]]
== Use LionWeb JSON type
Contrary to MPS, LionWeb supports link:{m3}#JSON[JSON as primitive type].

Add `io.lionweb.mps.m3.structure` to the _Dependencies_ of the structure aspect of your language, and use `JSON` as data type of your property.

NOTE: LionWeb-MPS currently does not validate the contents of a `JSON` property.
This might change in future releases.


[[attribute-limitations]]
== Limitations on attributes
MPS' link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#attributes[attributes] map to LionWeb's link:{m3}#Annotation[annotations].
MPS specifies details via _attribute info_.

However, LionWeb does not support all edge cases of attributes:

* LionWeb only supports attributes on nodes, i.e. specializations of `NodeAttribute`.
LionWeb does not support attributes on properties, children, and links, i.e. specializations of `PropertyAttribute`, ChildAttribute`, and `LinkAttribute`.
* LionWeb does not support annotations on all annotations i.e. the _attribute info / attributed concepts_ must not target `NodeAttribute`.


[[primitive-datatypes]]
== Partial support of primitive datatypes
LionWeb-MPS does not support MPS' primitive datatypes completely.
We _can_ process them based on the structure aspect of a language, but _not_ based on the run-time language representation (because primitive datatypes are not represented in the link:{slangdocs}/org/jetbrains/mps/openapi/language/SLanguage.html[SLanguage]).


[[enumeration-datatypes]]
== No support for legacy enumeration data types
LionWeb-MPS does not support deprecated link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#enumerationdatatypes[Enumeration Data Types].
Use Enumerations instead.

Commit message:

added remark about language validations

docs/reference/structure-extensions.adoc, after:

:m3: https://lionweb-io.github.io/specification/metametamodel/metametamodel.html
:mpshelp: https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps
:slangdocs: https://alexanderpann.github.io/mps-openapi-doc/javadoc_2021.2
:underbracket: &#9141;

= Reference for LionWeb Extensions on MPS' Language Structure Aspect
:experimental:
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 3
:sectnums:

LionWeb can represent MPS languages in LionCore.
It supports most MPS languages without changes to the language; all limitations are listed in this document.

[[prerequisites]]
== Prerequisites
We amend MPS' language structure aspect with node attributes to support advanced LionWeb features.

To use advanced LionWeb features, add `io.lionweb.mps.structure.attribute` to the _Used Languages_ of the structure aspect of your language.
Even if you don't need any advanced LionWeb features, you should add this _Used Language_ to all your LionWeb-processed languages: It checks the constraints described in this document. 


[[concept-partitions]]
== Concepts as partitions
In LionWeb, link:{m3}#partitions[partitions] serve as the container for one node tree (similar to _models_ in MPS).

Use intention menu:Toggle LionWeb Partition[] to add a boolean attribute `LionWeb partition` to a concept.
If no such attribute exists, we assume default value `false`.


[[optional-properties]]
== Optional properties
LionWeb supports link:{m3}#Feature.optional[optional properties] on structure level, whereas MPS only considers them on link:{mpshelp}/editor.html#propertycell[editor level].

Use intention menu:Toggle LionWeb Optional[] to add a boolean attribute `LionWeb optional` to a property.
If no such attribute exists, we assume default value `false`, i.e. consider the property as mandatory.


[[multi-references]]
== Multi-references
Unlike MPS, LionWeb supports link:{m3}#Link.multiple[multiple references], i.e. references with cardinality `{underbracket}..n`.
MPS approximates them with link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#smartreferences[smart references]; LionWeb formalizes this approach.

Use intention menu:Add LionWeb Smart Reference[] on a concept to turn the concept into a LionWeb smart reference.
Point the new attribute `LionWeb smart reference for` to a child with the smart reference as target.
LionWeb considers the child as a reference with the smart reference's target as type, and does not represent the smart reference itself.

=== Example
A `Book` can refer to zero or more `authors` of type `Writer`.
In MPS, we need an additional smart reference `WriterReference`, annotated with a `LionWeb smart reference for` that points at the child `Book.authors`.
LionWeb omits the smart reference, and turns MPS' `author` _child_ into a _reference_ with `multiple: true`.

.Book Concept
[text,subs="+quotes,replacements,attributes"]
----
_concept_ *Book* _extends_ *BaseConcept*
  ...
  _children:_
  *authors* : *WriterReference*[_0..n_]

  _references:_
  << .{empty}.. >>
----

.Writer Concept
[text,subs="+quotes,replacements,attributes"]
----
_concept_ *Writer* _extends_ *BaseConcept*
  ...
  _children:_
  << .{empty}.. >>

  _references:_
  << .{empty}.. >>
----

.WriterReference Concept
[text,subs="+quotes,replacements,attributes"]
----
_concept_ *WriterReference* _extends_ <default>
  ...
  _children:_
  << .{empty}.. >>

  _references:_
  *writer* : *Writer*[_1_]

  _LionWeb smart reference for:_ *Book.authors*
----

.LionWeb equivalent
[text,subs="+quotes,replacements,attributes"]
----
_Concept_ *Book*   _extends_ *Node*
  _Reference_ *authors*: *Writer*  _optional:_ *true*  _multiple:_ *true*

_Concept_ *Writer* _extends_ *Node*
  << .{empty}.. >>
----

=== Constraints on LionWeb smart reference concept
* Must be a concrete (i.e. non-`abstract`) concept
* Must not be used for anything else (e.g. a target of a reference, or super-concept)
* Must not extend any concept except `BaseConcept`
* Must not implement any interfaces
* Must not have any property members
* Must not have any child members
* Must have exactly one reference member


[[custom-keys]]
== Custom LionWeb keys
LionWeb uses link:{m3}#keys[keys] to refer to language entities.
By default, LionWeb-MPS derives the key from MPS' internal ids.
As language designer, we can customize the LionWeb key (e.g. if they need to be consistent across different implementations).

.Constraints
* Keys must be link:{m3}#identifiers[valid identifiers]
* Keys must be unique within one language.

[[custom-language-key]]
=== Custom language key
Create a root node of concept image:../../languages/io.lionweb.mps.structure.attribute/icons/lionweb.png[]{nbsp}``LionWeb Language Key`` inside a structure aspect to customize the language's key.

[[custom-element-key]]
=== Language element key
LionWeb-MPS supports custom keys for the following MPS language structure elements:

* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#conceptsandconceptinterfaces[Concept]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#conceptsandconceptinterfaces[Interface Concept]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#constraineddatatypes[Constrained Data Type]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#enumerationds[Enumeration]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#enumerationds[Enumeration Member]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#properties[Property]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#Children[Child]
* link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#references[Reference]

Use intention menu:Toggle LionWeb Key Annotation[] to add or remove a LionWeb key.
Alternatively, use intention menu:Remove LionWeb key[] on the key itself to remove.


[[json-type]]
== Use LionWeb JSON type
Contrary to MPS, LionWeb supports link:{m3}#JSON[JSON as primitive type].

Add `io.lionweb.mps.m3.structure` to the _Dependencies_ of the structure aspect of your language, and use `JSON` as data type of your property.

NOTE: LionWeb-MPS currently does not validate the contents of a `JSON` property.
This might change in future releases.


[[attribute-limitations]]
== Limitations on attributes
MPS' link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#attributes[attributes] map to LionWeb's link:{m3}#Annotation[annotations].
MPS specifies details via _attribute info_.

However, LionWeb does not support all edge cases of attributes:

* LionWeb only supports attributes on nodes, i.e. specializations of `NodeAttribute`.
LionWeb does not support attributes on properties, children, and links, i.e. specializations of `PropertyAttribute`, ChildAttribute`, and `LinkAttribute`.
* LionWeb does not support annotations on all annotations i.e. the _attribute info / attributed concepts_ must not target `NodeAttribute`.


[[primitive-datatypes]]
== Partial support of primitive datatypes
LionWeb-MPS does not support MPS' primitive datatypes completely.
We _can_ process them based on the structure aspect of a language, but _not_ based on the run-time language representation (because primitive datatypes are not represented in the link:{slangdocs}/org/jetbrains/mps/openapi/language/SLanguage.html[SLanguage]).


[[enumeration-datatypes]]
== No support for legacy enumeration data types
LionWeb-MPS does not support deprecated link:{mpshelp}/structure.html#enumerationdatatypes[Enumeration Data Types].
Use Enumerations instead.
